I. Because of issues with zoom on Linux,
I am using audio device on one computer
and screen sharing and so forth on another,
so I hope this works as well as it should.
Uhm, it does mean I'm going to be a little.
It's going to be hard for me to see the chat,
so maybe somebody will flag
questions as they come up.
I'm delighted to take questions as they
happen though I I don't necessarily want
to just do a stream of consciousness.
You know, 60 or 90 minute talk here.
I'd love it if folks have questions
so we can jump right to them.
Uhm? Alright, so I would
like to share my screen.
Looks like I have that ability.
Alright. Uhm?
So let's uhm. Let's see how
is the best way to do this.
Uhm, so I guess where I would like
to start is to sort of take a step
back and and look at what is Docker.
Why did we think it was a good idea to
use it for islandora and why institutions
that are adopting ISLANDORA might?
Decide to adopt Docker as
their way of deployment.
So sort of as a as a as a background to this.
In the. It in prior iterations,
really, the expectation for island
or was that you would have a single
server or a couple of servers
and you would go in and manually
install software on them for all the
dependencies that I owned or and needs,
and anybody who's maintained one if
not multiple instances of Islandora
knows how cumbersome that can be.
So when Docker started emerging I I
don't know, it's four or five years ago.
We started talking about doing this UM,
and ultimately there was a project
called I'll, which I'll go into.
That was part of a part of the island.
Are seven ecosystem for the last two,
two and a half,
maybe three years of island or 7.
And now that same concept has been
carried over for ISLANDORA 8 and
come in is currently I would say
that's sort of the the predominant.
Distribution or installation
method for islandora.
I know there are still institutions
that are uncomfortable with Docker and
I'll touch on that a little bit here.
But part of my objective here is
to to provide a little bit of
a window into Docker itself,
not just jump straight to I'll,
which is how you run islandora in Docker
and and therefore maybe with folks
having a better understanding of the
underpinnings of I'll, there might be.
A little bit more comfort with
those who are still uncomfortable
with it for adoption and.
I think those who who are using it
are using it in a variety of manners.
So what I'm going to describe
here is not the only way you can
do any of these things.
And part of the community that
we all enjoy being part of is.
Understanding how other people are using
the same software and seeing you know
seeing it in code in many instances
and and swapping tips and tricks.
So. Docker and Isle are pretty opinionated,
but they do leave you a lot of
flexibility as well and I hope
I'll be able to touch on that in
a useful way in this presentation.
Alright, So what I'm going to
go over is is what is Docker?
Why would you want to use Docker?
Why would you not want to use Docker?
And then we'll talk about I'll a bit.
So there are now three repository's that
you might be interested in in understanding.
There's the old legacy
Islandora version of IO,
and then there are two repository's.
That correspond to the island or a
8 or 2.0 version of a violent Dora.
And then at the very end we'll
touch on Kubernetes and sort of
like managing and maintaining a.
A island or a cluster?
And uh, and then if folks are interested,
I think we will need to have a
separate session to really go through.
I'll in detail, right?
So this is the objective of this
presentation is sort of to get
you comfortable and familiar with
the concepts behind I'll.
And by the end I will.
I will do a little demo somewhere
about 15 minutes before the end will
start a build in the background,
and then by the time we're done
with the slides,
it'll be done building and then we
can go and click around the site and.
And see how it is.
Uhm?
OK.
Uhm, so as I said,
let's start with the basics so.
So what is Docker?
Well, Docker is a containerization system,
and if you're familiar with virtual machines,
this is not a new concept concept for you.
What's really different between virtual
machines and Docker containers is that
virtual machine essentially has the full
operating system installed and running on it.
So, uhm. So there's quite a lot of overhead
if you want to run a whole bunch of machines.
If you have ever tried to run a bunch of
the old overzet once you know what I mean.
Whereas with Docker,
each of the little containers
really is a single service,
so you have a Drupal container and a triple F
container and a fedora container and whatnot,
and each one of those is
running a major process.
There are ways to have Docker
containers run a couple of processes
and we do use them in I'll,
but conceptually really,
they're really running.
Each container exists to
run one main process.
Uhm?
And the mechanism for doing this is called.
Uh. Actually, I'm not going to
jump into that. OK, so then,
if you think about virtual machines right?
One of the things you have to
define is how do you persist data?
The same is true for Docker.
And by default,
if you have a container that doesn't
have persistent data storage defined,
you turn on the container it runs
and does something like for example,
the fit service you want to be like this,
it just runs,
and if you send a request to it,
it'll do something with
it and return it to you,
but it doesn't store any state, right?
It's just a pass through call
and response service.
You shut it down and you turn it on.
You doesn't need to
remember what it did last,
'cause it just it processed those requests.
Whereas something like Fedora or a database.
Obviously you would want to persist the data.
You send us some data.
You want it to store it,
and then if you turn off all the
virtual machines and turn them on.
You really expect that that
data is still there,
so there are two ways of
doing that in in Docker,
one is called a Docker volume and
the other is called a bind mount.
And there are some intricate
differences between them,
but really,
the basic difference is Docker
volumes are kind of hidden from you.
They're stored like in a hidden
location on your hard disk.
You don't have to worry about
file permissions or anything like
that because you're not trying to
access them from your host machine.
But that's the difference, right?
You can't access them from your host machine,
whereas a bind mount is a folder
or a file on your host machine.
The computer you're running
this from that is shared, like,
mirrored into the running VM.
The running Docker container and
it can be shared into multiple.
Right, so if you have like.
I don't know a a certificate that
needs to be on multiple containers,
you just find mount that same
certificate into multiple
containers all at once.
They can all share the same file.
Up
another big advantage here is that you really
don't have to do everything by yourself,
so by this point in the open source software.
Ecosystem. Practically anything you
would want to run, unless you're
building that software yourself,
is available to you as a Docker container,
and the thing about the outdoor
project is that it is software
we're building ourselves, right?
So we had to build those
containers ourselves,
and that's where the the project
the aisle project came from.
The other great thing about this
is that Docker containers are
built essentially with basic.
System administration commands.
They're very legible for any sort
of assistance administrator,
and so you can pick up one of these things,
called the dockerfile and
and look at it yourself.
Understand exactly what's going on,
and then you can actually modify it.
You can actually take it and modify it,
or you can extend it.
You can take that that the output.
Of of somebody else is
creation and say alright,
start with that and now I'm
going to run a couple other,
you know app get installs or move
some files around or you know
bind about something else in.
So the concepts here are that
you have this the Docker client
that runs on your machine.
And you can do things like build containers.
They're building images,
rather you can pull images from a registry,
which is simply a place a remote registry.
Uhm, there's something called Docker Hub,
which is the easiest way to think about this.
It's like GitHub,
but instead of storing a source code,
it stores Docker images so they
our foundation, for example,
builds the quote unquote official images
for the island or a micro services,
and so forth, and pushes to Docker hub.
And if you say, give me islandora slash fits,
it will go and fetch from Docker hub.
The islandora slash fits image
for you to be able to run on.
Your own machine.
So yeah, so I was saying
these are pretty legible,
so this is an example dockerfile.
This one is the Postgres. Uhm?
Image now you can imagine there's already
a Postgres image out there, right?
The Postgres people have released a
Postgres image or for whatever reason we
decided we wanted to do to build our own,
either to make it smaller or to
do something precise with it.
But this is basically all it takes two
to have a a container that you built
from scratch that runs Postgres. Uhm?
So see these froms from is where you
start with somebody elses container.
So this from Alpine that you know that's
a base operating system container and
then we we also pull in the the base
container for the Isle repository and
then on top of that we essentially use
APK which is the Alpine package manager.
Sort of like apps get but for Alpine.
To add Postgres and Postgres client.
And then we do a little bit of stuff with
data management and permissions and, UM.
Uhm? And we set an environment variable
which is needed by the other or
expected by the other services and then.
We copy the contents of the of the
file structure that that created this.
I will click through to that for a second.
Oh, this is the.
This is the actual built image.
Whoops
will will look at the build kit repository
in a little more detail in a minute,
but I just want to pull this up so Postgres.
So see how there's this root FS.
So if you want to,
if you want to build files into this image,
you just put them in this root FS
section and that's what that last
line does is it takes that folder
called root FS which is present at
build time and it copies it to slash.
You know the root of your
of the container itself.
Alright, I'm just gonna pause
there for a second. Any questions?
I wonder if I might be useful know to
sort of point out the difference between.
Uh, the community that's maintaining
the dockerfiles versus the consuming
institutions that are pulling them in
terms of the relationship between looking
at these dockerfiles, for instance.
Sure, yeah, that's a good question.
Or a good observation.
So when you look at something like this on.
Uhm? Docker hub, right?
You can see that it is island or us.
Last slash postgres.
So the first half here is the
institution or the the group
that is making it available.
So this case this is coming
from the islandora folks.
Uhm, you know if we were to go look at
the official Postgres image, we can.
We can do that,
just search for it.
So here's the the quote,
unquote official one.
Uh, and because it's official,
there's no organization.
That's just.
It's sort of like the blue
check mark on Twitter.
But here here's another one.
This is a company called BITNAMI
that publishes like practically
every high profile open source
piece of software as a Docker image.
So if you were to be using this
in your application you would
be following Vietnamese release
schedule as opposed to the islandora
foundations really schedule or the
official image release schedule
and whatever the institution
is that's doing the Docker.
Releases gets to set their own schedule.
Right they there the process
might be automated.
It might be manual for aisle 7,
it is manual, we do it once a month.
Uhm, for I'll eight it is actually automated,
so anytime there is a commit
that is that is created on the
system to build goes out and.
Uh, and then we can tag it to make
it sort of an official release.
Anytime I saw a hand there,
I think it was Rosie.
Well,
I lowered it because you just
answered my question.
Outstanding alright great.
No, I'm I personally wonder if
it's worth mentioning and I'm not.
I'm not sure if you've already said this,
but like you're really giving the background
here and that if people coming into use,
I'll may never ever have to deal with this,
but it's really good to have
the fundamentals to start with.
So in case anybody out there is like,
Oh my gosh, this I have to do this to learn.
I'll know you don't, but it's nice to know
that if you do have to come in and do this,
here's how. Absolutely.
And then, in addition to that, I think no.
If you could unpack what the monthly
releases mean in terms of having for aisle 7,
having monthly releases of oil available
to the community as community members,
if we pull down those new images
each month after the release,
what's the benefit to us?
Could you unpack that because that's?
That's like the end user perspective of.
It's really easy to pull the images down.
What's the benefit to us? Sure,
so if you're running a bare metal server.
Or a virtual machine that you're just
managing the host operating system on.
You'll be doing package updates,
but not only will you be
doing package updates,
but you'll be manually doing
updates on things like.
You know Tomcat and UM,
Imagemagick and so forth.
Things that aren't packaged released perhaps?
Or that the islandora
doesn't use the package?
You know the current package released
version and that gets tedious,
especially for larger upgrades.
So you can see again this
from Alpine three DOT 13.2.
That's a that's a version release
of an operating system right there.
Alpine releases all the time,
and this very well could say from Alpine
latest and then it would automatically.
Keep up every time there was a build with
whatever the latest Alpine build was.
So when when the institution that
you're following publishes a new image,
depending on how how this sort
of from hierarchy is handled,
you're typically getting updates
all the way up the chain,
right?
You're getting you're getting
every little component within
all of these components updated,
and so all you do is you swap out your
containers and you have a complete set.
Of security updates for for your images.
For basically everything that
runs in your system,
but you know if there's
a magic number like this,
you have to be relying on the maintainers
to be updating that magic number.
Right?
Is is I'll regularly updated I'll 8 I 8 is?
I late does not have a formal
release cycle right now.
I would say that's an issue.
But I'll 7 does 07 does, yeah.
We we built it up and we use it with
all of our own door seven clients and
so in order to do our work as a vendor,
we do those releases and and the
Community is able to use those same ones.
I anticipate something like that
will happen without Dora 8 as
sites move into production sites
using I'll move into production.
So it's kind of like a a critic.
We need a critical mass of people
of institutions to be committed
to Isleta to do this. Uhm?
Yeah, that critical mass is small.
Like OK, We're committed to on to
I'll and we'll be doing this, but.
And I know lyricist is using oil images
to some degree, and Johns Hopkins.
And like there there are a number of
institutions which are about to publish
sites that are all relying on this quirk.
Also, Quirk will come up later on this call.
And I think that's it, right?
There's very few,
so there there are islandora 8
sites that are in production,
but I I think they were
all hand built basically.
And now this first wave of dockerized
systems are about to hit production,
and that's when formal release
schedules will be established.
So can I can I make one more comment there?
Yeah, I think the beauty of Isle would
it offers is it offers institutions
the ability to keep their island or a
platform their repository up to date
in a way that's simple, whereas for
much more simple than it used to be.
Because instead of before we're
institutions were bound to keep all of these
different modules and packages updated.
And the reality is that many institutions
fell behind and we're way far out of date.
Of updates which left
their systems vulnerable.
Now simply pulling down,
doing a doctor pole pulls down all of
the images and you have the ability to
then test that on your staging server
and if it looks good and it works then
you push it to your production and
then all of a sudden your tomcat and
your my SQL database have all been
upgraded to the latest version so
there aren't security vulnerabilities
for your for your platform and it's
a common platform that we share.
Thanks David of Rosie.
Uhm, so I don't know if this is
the right time to ask this uhm,
but I'm not clear on what.
You still need to update yourself because
as I understand you can update, uhm.
Like the user facing things
to an island or a user,
include your Drupal version,
your Drupal module version,
the security updates that go into there.
You know, even things like
brush if if you can even run
is Russia thing in I'll come.
And so yeah, uh, is there still like what?
What is still required for
like to get manual updates?
Yeah, absolutely, OK.
So I'm going to skip ahead to this slide,
which is about maintenance with I'll so,
so Rosie. You're absolutely right, right?
And in my mind I separate this into
three categories when you're using,
I'll or Docker in general.
There are three things that
you're still updating.
There is the host server,
which is the the actual or virtual
machine that Docker is running.
On that, that is still a normal server
unless you're using like elastic
container service or something like that,
and that needs app get or Yum updates, right?
But there's not that much installed on it,
it's like the base OS and Docker and
Git and I don't know the the list
we have is like 10 or 12 things.
It's really not much and they're
all packaged managed,
so that's that's easy.
Then there's island or dependencies,
which I would say is close to 100%
covered by I'll out of the box,
and if it's not covered by
I'll out of the box,
then you as an institution will will
have modified it like you'll have your
own version of the Fitz container.
If you need to modify how the
how Fitz behaves.
Uh,
that that's like a level two sort of
conversation and I I would advise we
sort of come back to that in a bit.
But that's one thing, right?
So I'll provide.
And updated version of all of those
services so you can count on everything in.
This diagram. As being covered by.
I'll write there is a Houdini.
Image and a hypercube image
and homerus image etc.
And all of those things.
As David said, you just Docker compose down.
Docker pull to get the new
images Docker compose up,
bring your system back up and
you've got all of the latest,
and sometimes there's a
little bit you have to do.
If there were backwards incompatible
changes that happened in there,
like for example if you moved
from Fedora 5 to Fedora 6,
you'd have to, you know,
rig your data a little bit, but that's.
You know you would know about that.
That would not be just a
point security release.
Sort of a thing.
And then the third category.
The third category is your
Drupal application, UM,
01 more because you mentioned Rush.
I put brush in the second bullet.
Drush is built in to the
Drupal container, right?
So that's something that's just there.
When you spin up the Drupal container,
and unless you have packed a
different version of Drush into your
application which Drupal allows.
But anyway, so the third category
is your Drupal application.
You still do need to do module updates.
And and what not inside of
your Drupal application.
So it's not the same thing,
it it's not like I'll replaces
the island or a code based,
but rather your island or a code
base is embedded inside of it.
It is just.
It is bind mounted in to
the Drupal container.
So I go back to this.
Right your your your application lives here.
And everything else,
essentially you can take out of the
box from the island or foundation.
You never have to worry about installing
any of these things by hand again,
or updating them.
All you have to do is treat this like
it's a pure Drupal application and
just update Drupal using composer.
And like so that you know as a vendor
that runs a bunch of different
sites like that's what makes all
of this feasible that we don't have
to have somebody whose job is just,
you know, maintenance 24/7. Right?
It also it also means Rosie that
because your your island or a code base,
your Drupal is bind mounted and
correct me know if I'm phrasing this
incorrectly because it's bind mounted,
you can make customizations
so that you are institutions.
Islandora is running differently than
our institutions or than some other
institutions and they all persist
because that's bind mounted and sort
of slurped or mirrored into the the
aisle container that uses that code.
So if you want to install a new module,
you'll do that on your find mount.
Then you'll you'll do it there and then.
It will live forever so that you can
keep pulling down new Docker images.
And even new Drupal Docker images,
but it won't affect the customized
code that you have on your side.
Yeah, let me.
I'll do a better job or I'll I'll
illustrate what David is saying.
See this.
This is the LDC project,
and that's the thing you get
from the foundation.
Will talk about the structure of
this a little bit in a minute,
but there is this code base folder
and in aisle 7 actually we had this.
Just be an empty folder.
That's like a git submodule that has
a totally different codebase where
you used or this we actually found.
Again in in the process of
managing a whole bunch of these,
they're keeping two repository's In Sync,
a file repository and an island or
repository was was unnecessarily complex,
and it just tripped you up
more than it helped you.
So now and or 8 we've actually gone
with a single repository that has both
the aisle Docker compose code and the
code base all checked into one repository,
and then it's always perfectly In Sync,
and things are actually a lot simpler.
But yeah,
Rosie this is just a.
Like a Drupal app with a composer,
file etc.
In here and you can do anything to that
that you could to any other triple app.
So sorry just a follow up question.
When you said that they're In Sync, was
that just a like logistical managing thing,
or are there actually dependencies that
happened between the stuff in the codebase
folder and your other Docker containers?
Sure, OK, so for example,
imagine you wanted to add rip rap as a as a.
As a thing to your island or application,
I would say that there's
two things you would do.
One is you would run composer require.
Where's my modules here?
So you need to get the Drupal module for it,
but would also make me to have
the service which is a separate
container and so that's right.
If you have one.
But if you have,
if your Drupal thinks it's got one,
but it doesn't, then you're in trouble.
Yeah, yeah.